README.md, before:

# Python Project Template

A modern Python project template using Nix flakes, uv for dependency management, ruff for linting/formatting, and basedpyright for type checking.

## Features

- Python 3.14 - Latest Python version
- uv - Fast Python package installer and dependency manager
- Nix Flakes - Reproducible development environment
- Ruff - Fast Python linter and formatter with isort
- basedpyright - Advanced type checker
- pre-commit - Automated code quality checks
- coverage - Code coverage tracking for tests
- Dependency groups - Organized dev and test dependencies

## Prerequisites

- [Nix](https://nixos.org) with flakes enabled
- [direnv](https://direnv.net/) (optional, for automatic environment activation)

**Recommended:** Use the [Determinate Nix Installer](https://determinate.systems/nix-installer/) for the easiest installation experience. It enables flakes by default and provides automated uninstallation.

<details>
<summary>Alternative: Official Nix installer</summary>

If you prefer the official installer, follow the instructions at [nixos.org/download](https://nixos.org/download.html).

Note that the official installer does not automate the uninstallation process.
</details>

## Quick Start

### 1. Create Your Project

**Recommended:** Use GitHub's template feature

1. Click the "Use this template" button at the top of this repository
2. Create a new repository from the template
3. Clone your new repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/<your-username>/<your-project-name>
cd <your-project-name>

# If using direnv
direnv allow

# Or manually enter the nix shell
nix develop
```

<details>
<summary>Alternative: Manual clone (hosting agnostic)</summary>

```bash
# Clone the template repository
git clone https://github.com/mehmet-canb/python-uv-template <your-project-name>
cd <your-project-name>

# Remove the template's git history and start fresh
rm -rf .git
git init
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit"

# Add your own remote (example uses GitHub)
git remote add origin https://github.com/<your-username>/<your-project-name>
git push -u origin main
```

</details>

The Nix shell will automatically:
- Install Python 3.14, uv, ruff, basedpyright, and pre-commit
- Sync dependencies with `uv sync`
- Activate the virtual environment
- Install pre-commit hooks

### 2. Install Dependencies

```bash
# Install development dependencies
uv sync --group dev

# Install test dependencies
uv sync --group test

# Install all dependencies
uv sync --all-groups
```

### 3. Run the Application

```bash
# Using the CLI entry point
uv run app

# Or directly with Python
uv run python -m app.main
```

## Development

### Code Quality

The project uses pre-commit hooks to enforce code quality:

```bash
# Run all hooks manually
pre-commit run --all-files

# Hooks run automatically on git commit
git commit -m "your message"
```

Hooks include:
- Trailing whitespace removal
- Large file detection
- Python AST validation
- TOML/YAML validation
- Ruff linting (with isort for import sorting)
- Ruff formatting
- basedpyright type checking

### Type Checking

```bash
# Run type checker manually
basedpyright

# Or for specific files
basedpyright src/app/main.py
```

### Linting and Formatting

```bash
# Check for issues
ruff check .

# Auto-fix issues
ruff check --fix .

# Format code
ruff format .
```

### Testing

This template supports both unit testing with pytest and metric-based evaluation scripts.

```bash
# Run unit tests with coverage
uv run pytest
```

See [tests/README.md](tests/README.md) for detailed testing documentation.

## Project Structure

```
.
├── flake.lock # Development dependency locks
├── flake.nix # Development environment specifications
├── pyproject.toml # Python project specifications
├── README.md # This file
├── src
│   └── app
│       ├── __init__.py
│       └── main.py # Entry point for the program
├── tests/
└── uv.lock # Python dependency locks
```

## Configuration

### Project Metadata

Update `pyproject.toml` to customize your project:

```toml
[project]
name = "app"  # Change to your project name
version = "0.1.0"
description = "An app description"  # Add your description
authors = [{ name = "Your Name" }]  # Update author info
```

WARNING: Update the console script in `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[project.scripts]
app = "app.main:main"  # Change both "app" (command name) and "app.main" (module path)
```

WARNING: Update the isort configuration in `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[tool.ruff.lint.isort]
known-first-party = ["app"]  # Change "app" to your package name
```

WARNING: Update the pytest configuration in `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[tool.pytest.ini_options]
addopts = "-v --maxfail=1 --cov=app --cov-report=html:tests/test_results/htmlcov"
# Change "app" to your package name
```

### Changing Python Version

The Python version is read from the `.python-version` file:

```bash
# Change Python version (e.g., to 3.13)
uv python pin 3.13

# Update the uv lock file for the new Python version
uv lock

# Re-enter the Nix shell to use the new version
nix develop
```

**Note**: nixpkgs only provides major.minor Python versions by default (e.g., `python313`, `python314`). Patch-specific versions require additional Nix overlays. See comments in `flake.nix` for details.

### Adding Dependencies

```bash
# Add a production dependency
uv add package-name

# Add a dev dependency
uv add --group dev package-name

# Add a test dependency
uv add --group test package-name
```

### Ruff Configuration

Ruff is configured in `pyproject.toml` with:
- Line length: 88 (Black-compatible)
- Enabled rules: C (complexity), E (errors), F (pyflakes), W (warnings), I (isort)
- Auto-fixing enabled for most rules
- Python 3.14 target

### Basedpyright Configuration

Basedpyright is configured in `pyproject.toml` with:
- Recommended type checking rules
- Including only project files
- Linux oriented target

## Common Tasks

### Update Dependencies

```bash
# Update all dependencies
uv lock --upgrade

# Update specific package
uv lock --upgrade-package package-name
```

### Clean Build Artifacts

```bash
# Remove cache directories
rm -rf __pycache__ .ruff_cache .pytest_cache .mypy_cache
rm -rf .coverage htmlcov/ tests/test_results/
rm -rf build/ dist/ *.egg-info
```

### Update Pre-commit Hooks

```bash
pre-commit autoupdate
```

## License

MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

Add the missing Makefile configuration change to the README
Makefile should be changed to be able to use the template properly.
Previously, README.md missed this information. It is added now.

README.md, after:

# Python Project Template

A modern Python project template using Nix flakes, uv for dependency management, ruff for linting/formatting, and basedpyright for type checking.

## Features

- Python 3.14 - Latest Python version
- uv - Fast Python package installer and dependency manager
- Nix Flakes - Reproducible development environment
- Ruff - Fast Python linter and formatter with isort
- basedpyright - Advanced type checker
- pre-commit - Automated code quality checks
- coverage - Code coverage tracking for tests
- Dependency groups - Organized dev and test dependencies

## Prerequisites

- [Nix](https://nixos.org) with flakes enabled
- [direnv](https://direnv.net/) (optional, for automatic environment activation)

**Recommended:** Use the [Determinate Nix Installer](https://determinate.systems/nix-installer/) for the easiest installation experience. It enables flakes by default and provides automated uninstallation.

<details>
<summary>Alternative: Official Nix installer</summary>

If you prefer the official installer, follow the instructions at [nixos.org/download](https://nixos.org/download.html).

Note that the official installer does not automate the uninstallation process.
</details>

## Quick Start

### 1. Create Your Project

**Recommended:** Use GitHub's template feature

1. Click the "Use this template" button at the top of this repository
2. Create a new repository from the template
3. Clone your new repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/<your-username>/<your-project-name>
cd <your-project-name>

# If using direnv
direnv allow

# Or manually enter the nix shell
nix develop
```

<details>
<summary>Alternative: Manual clone (hosting agnostic)</summary>

```bash
# Clone the template repository
git clone https://github.com/mehmet-canb/python-uv-template <your-project-name>
cd <your-project-name>

# Remove the template's git history and start fresh
rm -rf .git
git init
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit"

# Add your own remote (example uses GitHub)
git remote add origin https://github.com/<your-username>/<your-project-name>
git push -u origin main
```

</details>

The Nix shell will automatically:
- Install Python 3.14, uv, ruff, basedpyright, and pre-commit
- Sync dependencies with `uv sync`
- Activate the virtual environment
- Install pre-commit hooks

### 2. Install Dependencies

```bash
# Install development dependencies
uv sync --group dev

# Install test dependencies
uv sync --group test

# Install all dependencies
uv sync --all-groups
```

### 3. Run the Application

```bash
# Using the CLI entry point
uv run app

# Or directly with Python
uv run python -m app.main
```

## Development

### Code Quality

The project uses pre-commit hooks to enforce code quality:

```bash
# Run all hooks manually
pre-commit run --all-files

# Hooks run automatically on git commit
git commit -m "your message"
```

Hooks include:
- Trailing whitespace removal
- Large file detection
- Python AST validation
- TOML/YAML validation
- Ruff linting (with isort for import sorting)
- Ruff formatting
- basedpyright type checking

### Type Checking

```bash
# Run type checker manually
basedpyright

# Or for specific files
basedpyright src/app/main.py
```

### Linting and Formatting

```bash
# Check for issues
ruff check .

# Auto-fix issues
ruff check --fix .

# Format code
ruff format .
```

### Testing

This template supports both unit testing with pytest and metric-based evaluation scripts.

```bash
# Run unit tests with coverage
uv run pytest
```

See [tests/README.md](tests/README.md) for detailed testing documentation.

## Project Structure

```
.
├── flake.lock # Development dependency locks
├── flake.nix # Development environment specifications
├── pyproject.toml # Python project specifications
├── README.md # This file
├── src
│   └── app
│       ├── __init__.py
│       └── main.py # Entry point for the program
├── tests/
└── uv.lock # Python dependency locks
```

## Configuration

### Project Metadata

Update `pyproject.toml` to customize your project:

```toml
[project]
name = "app"  # Change to your project name
version = "0.1.0"
description = "An app description"  # Add your description
authors = [{ name = "Your Name" }]  # Update author info
```

WARNING: Update the console script in `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[project.scripts]
app = "app.main:main"  # Change both "app" (command name) and "app.main" (module path)
```

WARNING: Update the isort configuration in `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[tool.ruff.lint.isort]
known-first-party = ["app"]  # Change "app" to your package name
```

WARNING: Update the pytest configuration in `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[tool.pytest.ini_options]
addopts = "-v --maxfail=1 --cov=app --cov-report=html:tests/test_results/htmlcov"
# Change "app" to your package name
```

WARNING: Update the `Makefile`:

```make
run: ## Run the application
	# Change the app to the package name
	uv run app
```

### Changing Python Version

The Python version is read from the `.python-version` file:

```bash
# Change Python version (e.g., to 3.13)
uv python pin 3.13

# Update the uv lock file for the new Python version
uv lock

# Re-enter the Nix shell to use the new version
nix develop
```

**Note**: nixpkgs only provides major.minor Python versions by default (e.g., `python313`, `python314`). Patch-specific versions require additional Nix overlays. See comments in `flake.nix` for details.

### Adding Dependencies

```bash
# Add a production dependency
uv add package-name

# Add a dev dependency
uv add --group dev package-name

# Add a test dependency
uv add --group test package-name
```

### Ruff Configuration

Ruff is configured in `pyproject.toml` with:
- Line length: 88 (Black-compatible)
- Enabled rules: C (complexity), E (errors), F (pyflakes), W (warnings), I (isort)
- Auto-fixing enabled for most rules
- Python 3.14 target

### Basedpyright Configuration

Basedpyright is configured in `pyproject.toml` with:
- Recommended type checking rules
- Including only project files
- Linux oriented target

## Common Tasks

### Update Dependencies

```bash
# Update all dependencies
uv lock --upgrade

# Update specific package
uv lock --upgrade-package package-name
```

### Clean Build Artifacts

```bash
# Remove cache directories
rm -rf __pycache__ .ruff_cache .pytest_cache .mypy_cache
rm -rf .coverage htmlcov/ tests/test_results/
rm -rf build/ dist/ *.egg-info
```

### Update Pre-commit Hooks

```bash
pre-commit autoupdate
```

## License

MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
